the megalodon shark roamed the oceans
scaring and chewing everything to pieces
long after the dinosaurs were wiped out
by the great meteorite
we know that it was the largest and most
brutal predator that ever lived
as well as the biggest shark it was the
king of all seas
swimming freely between most parts of
the ocean but then
about two and a half million years ago
the last of its kind disappeared from
earth forever
leaving only their huge teeth to be
found by modern archaeologists
at first scientists thought it was a
mass marine extinction that happened
around the time that caused the
megalodon to expire
they believe a supernova exploded some
150 light years from earth
and its radiation reached our planet
changing its climate
well this could have happened when a
star explodes it gives off so much
energy that it goes for hundreds
and even thousands of light years in all
directions if some of that heat struck
our planet
it could have warmed it up making life
impossible for lots of animal species
including the megalodon but then in 2019
a group of researchers found something
weird the fossils left over from the
monster sharks
dated back to an earlier period that
could mean they went extinct before the
supernova
a new explanation had to be devised and
it came from an
unexpected source the great white sharks
at the peak of their evolutionary career
the megalodons were apex predators
meaning they had no rivals among the
other ocean hunters
their favorite prey were whales and
other marine mammals
and they could even hunt down smaller
sharks not only were they huge
reaching over 60 feet in length and 50
tons in weight
but they also had the strongest bite in
the world
nothing that had a fight with a meg
could go away unscathed
an important note most of what we know
about the megalodon comes from their
teeth
because they were the only bony remains
left after their extinction
sharks are mostly cartilage so they have
little bone in their skeleton
lots of cartilage makes them agile and
flexible as well as allows them to open
their mouth to
enormous width at some point sharks
also develop protruding jaws to have a
better grip on their prey
something most obvious in the modern
goblin shark their teeth however
had to be tougher than cartilage so they
evolved into
a sort of tooth factory sharks have rows
upon rows of pointy sharp teeth
usually directed inwards like hooks
which get worn out pretty quickly
then when no longer needed they fall off
making way for new ones
a single shark can replace all the teeth
in its jaws
as many as 50 times in its lifetime now
the megalodon
is usually described as a sort of
gigantic version of a great white shark
this is a common mistake though made
because they were thought to be related
in fact the meg looked more like a
modern bull shark
it had a short snout a flat lower jaw
and long
and massive pectoral fins that supported
its weight
and what's more important the ancestors
of today's great whites
existed at the same time as the
megalodon
with great size comes great clumsiness
though
although the mag was huge and powerful
it was also
not as nimble as the smaller and quicker
great white sharks
researchers believe that great whites
actually rivaled with the megalodon for
food and
were often more successful hunters
thanks to their agility
they couldn't fight the meg openly but
were fast enough to get the prey the meg
had marked for itself
and steal it and still this doesn't
exactly explain why the meigs went
extinct
great whites might have hunted down
smaller prey but they couldn't fell a
whale
the favorite food of megalodons another
fact contradicting this theory
is that a single species probably
couldn't lead to the extinction of
another
there should have been others to help a
new theory arose that said
not only great whites but also tiger
sharks and makos
took part in the fate of the megalodon
both of these species were
and still remain even smaller than great
whites
but they were efficient hunters as well
they were fast and ferocious
leaving the big and clumsy mag without
much food in the oceans
when the monster shark tried to take
away the prey from its smaller rivals
they simply scattered unwilling to pick
a fight with the bully
and so it happened that the only food
left for the megalodon were whales
and equally big marine animals adult
megs could easily hunt down such beasts
but their offspring were much smaller
and more vulnerable than their parents
scientists believe other sharks could
have used this to their advantage
while the megalodon was still little it
often became prey for great whites
bulls and tiger sharks even then a great
white shark could reach the length of 18
feet while a megalodon kid was typically
twice smaller
sometimes they could have fought off
other predators but certainly not
always but even if there was no open
confrontation between
young megalodons and smaller adult
sharks
meg kids wouldn't have been able to find
food for themselves to grow to adulthood
the reason is the same the population of
other sharks was growing
and they were rivaling with each other
and the megs for convenient prey
the more there were great whites and the
rest the less food remained for the
young monster sharks
eventually they would have simply
starved as if this wasn't enough for the
megalodon to cease to exist
their favorite big munch the whales
began to adapt to changing conditions on
earth
the mag was a warm loving shark and it
was abundant in tropical and subtropical
waters
when they first evolved about 20 million
years ago the climate on the planet was
much milder
both land and seas were generally warmer
and so the meg could swim
wherever it pleased it coursed the
waters of both south and north atlantic
as well as the pacific and its teeth
were found even
in the modern day deserts of africa as
the years went by
the climate went on changing though it
became extremely cold
closer to the poles and lots of marine
animals and fish had to adapt to this
temperature shift the megalodon however
didn't go with the flow
it still loved warm waters so it stayed
where it felt comfortable
its area of presence shrinking what it
didn't realize was that the whales were
among those
who became cool with the cool the big
mammals went further and further north
enjoying the light chill and sudden
freedom from their only predators
the megalodon didn't follow also about
three million years ago
the planet entered a climactic cycle
roughly similar to what we have today
the glaciers in the north went as far
down as north america in winter
and slid back in summer krill the
favorite food of bolin whales boomed in
colony growth in the coastal areas
the whales got the hint and moved to
where the prey was most abundant
leaving their previous dwelling areas
behind this allowed them to grow in size
as they could feed undisturbed as much
as they wanted
in the meantime there were vast regions
absolutely devoid of any food between
the coasts
and so it happened that the enormous
predator the megalodon
was left to its gloomy fate its main
dish had gone to colder waters
and the smaller prey was devoured by its
nimbler and less hungry rivals
the numbers of these great hunters of
the sea were dwindling
fast until none remained to rule the
waters
and that's how eventually the great
white sharks
became the most fearsome predators in
the ocean